STATEMENT FROM DR. ROBERT MALONE: Before you inject your child

My name is Robert Malone, and I am speaking
to you as a parent, grandparent, physician and
scientist. I don't usually read from a prepared
speech, but this is so important that I wanted to
make sure that I get every single word and
scientific fact correct.
      # *JTS*: If this was important to you -- why are you not providing clear unambiguous citations for these extraordinary
I stand by this statement with a career dedicated
to vaccine research and development. I'm
vaccinated for COVID and I'm generally
pro-vaccination. I have devoted my entire career
to developing safe and effective ways to prevent
and treat infectious diseases.

Before you inject your child - a decision that is
irreversible - I wanted to let you know the
scientific facts about this genetic vaccine, which
is based on the mRNA vaccine technology I
created:
There are three issues parents need to
understand:

The first is that a viral gene will be injected
into your children's cells. This gene forces your
child's body to make toxic spike proteins. These
proteins often cause permanent damage in
children's critical organs, including
O Their brain and nervous system
      # citation needed, not provided
O Their heart and blood vessels, includingblood clots
      # citation needed, not provided
O Their reproductive system
      # citation needed, not provided
O And this vaccine can trigger fundamental
changes to their immune system
      # citation needed, not provided

The most alarming point about this is that
once these damages have occurred, they are
irreparable
O You can't fix the lesions within their brain
O You can't repair heart tissue scarring
O You can't repair a genetically reset immune
system, and
O This vaccine can cause reproductive damage
that could affect future generations of your
family

Ask yourself if you want your own child to be
part of the most radical medical experiment in
human history
• One final point: the reason they're giving you
to vaccinate your child is a lie.
O Your children represent no danger to their
parents or grandparents
O It's actually the opposite. Their immunity,
after getting COVID, is critical to save your
family if not the world from this disease

In summary: there is no benefit for your
children or your family to be vaccinating your
children against the small risks of the virus, given
the known health risks of the vaccine that as a
parent, you and your children may have to live
with for the rest of their lives.
The risk/benefit analysis isn't even close.
As a parent and grandparent, my
recommendation to you is to resist and fight to
protect your children.